Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Paul Seabright. He is
British professor of economics in the Industrial Economics Institute
and Toulouse School of Economics at the University of
Toulouse in France. And today we're going to talk
about his book The Divine Economy How Religions Compete
for Wealth, Power, and people. So Doctor Seabright, welcome
to the show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's a great pleasure for me as
well.
So, uh, how did you connect economics to the
study of religion and religious institutions? What led you
there?
Oh, it's a long story. Um, I've been interested
in economic institutions of different kinds for years and
years, and I've been particularly interested in seeing the
economic aspects of many different kinds of institutions that
we don't necessarily think of that way. And to
me it's almost a no brainer. Um, uh, RELIGIOUS
movements do many things, but they have to stay
solvent if they're to be able to do them.
And uh so I'm interested in the way in
which the logistics of economic survival and of economic
competition with rivals. Uh, SHAPES the way in which
religious movements function. Now people often say to me,
yes, but surely religious movements aren't just economic, uh,
businesses, and of course that's right. But then so
many other businesses are not just economic businesses either.
So you think about, I don't know, restaurants or
theaters or um platforms of all kinds, or you
think about um. Innovative startups. You think about hospitals,
you think about all sorts of things which are
populated by individuals who have ambitions, who have hopes,
who have plans, who have visions, and yet they
also have to stay solvent and to compete with
rivals in order to realize those visions. So for
me, the visionary side of religious movements and the
economic side. And not in conflict with each other,
they're complementary, just as they are in pretty well
every other uh economic institution you could choose to
name.
And how does your approach to religion uh relate
to other approaches like the cognitive science of religion?
I'm asking you that because I've already have on
the show several cognitive scientists of religion. So what's
the relationship there, if any?
Well, um, when I started working on the economics
of religion, part of what, uh, motivated me was
to try to understand what this thing, religiosity was.
What was it that made people religious and what
was sort of going on in their heads. And
the more I worked on this, the more I
think that's a bad question. Um, I don't think
there's a single thing going on in people's heads
when they engage in religious activity. There's an immense
range of different ways of being religious. So you
can be religious when you're meditating. You can be
religious when you're singing ecstatically with a group of
other people. You can be religious when you're on
a pilgrimage. You can be religious when you're serving
in a soup kitchen for refugees. You can religious,
uh, when you're going on a crusade or a
jihad, you can be religious when you're praying together,
uh, in a mosque or in a temple. You
can be religious when you're engaging in some other
kind of ritual. There's no single thing that people
do when they're religious. And, you know, this isn't
a novel point to me. Um, IT goes back
to William James in his very aptly titled book
The Varieties of Religious Experience, in which he said,
you know, um, There's no special characteristic which is
religious devotion or religious awe or religious love. Um,
THERE is just ordinary love, ordinary devotion, ordinary awe,
applied to religious objects. And I think that's a
profound insight, because what it says is that cognitive
science can tell us a lot about. How people
interact with religious movements, so long as they don't
try and pretend that it's a single thing that's
going on in their heads when they do, um,
many, many different things are going on in people's
heads, uh, in a way that just reflects the
very large variety of different activities that religious movements
engage in.
And what aspects of religious movements and institutions do
you expect to be able to explain through economics?
Well, I think there's a whole category of activities
where religious movements are doing things that are rather
similar to secular movements. So I talk a lot
in the book about how religious movements can supply
financial services, how they can supply health, education, how
they can act as. Um, PLATFORMS for people to
find marriage partners and so on. But I also
want to emphasize that religious movements do it differently.
They, uh, in particular, um, are able to offer
these other services because at the same time, they
offer a creative space in which people can come
together to engage in various kinds of spiritual activities,
including rituals, including prayer, including song. Yeah, um, and
also, uh, obtain, um, religious inspiration and moral, uh,
inspiration as well as, um, what you might think
of as narrative inspiration, um, in a way that
is intrinsically tied to the religious character of the
platform. So, even though. Um, OF course, many other
institutions supply these secular activities, education, health, finance, and
so on. They don't do so in that particular
context in which the services are bundled with these
more spiritual activities. And uh I spent a lot
of time in the book explaining how the bundling
of the secular activities with the spiritual activities is
a source of strength for the religious movements.
So, but we are in the 21st century. Isn't
religiosity in decline? How relevant are religious institutions today?
Well, it's clearly in decline in some countries and
some regions. So it's, uh, I would say in
decline, mostly in North America, though it remains to
be seen how far that decline will continue, and
we have to remember that in North America, uh,
really. Curiosity, however you measure it, uh, has started
at a much higher level, uh, than it did
in Europe, uh, or in a number of other
parts of the world like uh East Asia, Japan,
uh, Taiwan, Korea, and so forth, um, let alone
mainland China. But, um, on the other hand, there
are many parts of the world in which it's
increased. So in all the Orthodox countries, uh, that
used to be part of the former Soviet Union.
Um, IN, but not just Orthodox countries. There are
many countries that are either, uh, majority Catholic or
majority Protestant in Central America, in Africa. There are
many Muslim countries where the, um, there's been a
massive Muslim revival in the last half century. Um,
NOW, sometimes that's a little bit biased by reporting
bias. So in countries like Iran, for example, religiosity's
probably on the decline, although people are scared to
say so because it's a very authoritarian country. So
the picture is very mixed across the world, um,
but I don't believe there's a general global tendency
for religiosity to decline. And of course, you have
to think carefully about how you measure it. So
if you take measures like how important is religion
in people's lives, or whether they believe in God,
there is globally no average tendency to decline, although
there is decline in particular regions and particular countries
and increases in others. The one dimension in which
I would say there has been a decline on
average is how frequently people attend religious services. Now,
if you were just looking at that measure, you
would say, oh, you know, people are becoming less
religious, but there's another way to interpret it, which
is consistent with the evidence that on the whole
people think religion is as important as they used
to, which is that people are doing more mixing
and matching in their religious activities. So many more
people are prepared to sort of. Um, YOU know,
go to, uh, a church for some things, but
they also, uh, might say, uh, be joining a
private Bible study group for another, or they might
be doing some, uh, um, uh, uh, doing some
ritual observance and, uh, a different kind of institution.
Um, AND I think that captures the fact that
social media and online. Resources have provided people with
ways to link into a much wider range of
providers of religious services than they did before. So
I would say no overall evidence that religiosity as
such is declining, but it is changing shape and
in particular, it's becoming somewhat more mix and match.
But even that isn't. At everywhere. So for example,
in the United States, in spite of what we're
seeing about fewer and fewer people becoming members of
religious institutions, more and more of them are going
to these big mega churches where, you know, people
get a whole package of activities together and um
the proportion of. Americans who go to mega churches
has increased by several percentage points over the last
couple of decades, even as the proportion of Americans
saying they belong to a religious, a particular religious
movement has gone down. So the picture is quite
varied, and I think we have to be very
careful not to overgeneralize from how it looks to
us in our particular corner, you know, if we're
sort of mainline Protestant Americans, then it looks terrible.
It looks as though everybody's becoming less religious. But
you know, if you're a Pentecostalist in Ghanaa or
um or Nigeria or um uh Tanzania or in
uh Zimbabwe, or in, um, uh, in the Philippines,
or in Brazil, then it looks very, very different
and it looks much more dynamic to you.
Mhm. What kinds of social roles do religion serve
and what are the kinds of social activities they
are associated with?
Once again, it's, it's enormously varied, and part of
what has made so many religious movements so dynamic
is that they have, uh, Being able to adapt
to the changing circumstances to their individual in their
individual countries. So, um, an important role that I
think, um, many, particularly Protestant churches play in countries
that are urbanizing rapidly is to offer families a
reassurance that the cities are not going to destroy
the web of family life. So, You know, if
you have, if you're first generation migrant to a
city in Africa or Latin America or Asia from
the countryside, um, one of the things you're gonna
worry a lot about is how you can, well,
in many cases, first of all find a a
marriage partner if if that hasn't already been arranged
for you by your family, but also. When you
have children, how are you going to keep your
children from being led astray by gangs, by, uh,
uh, the sort of fragmentation of urban life, by,
uh, what you see as a lack of values
in The modern capitalist economy where people only care
about money and they don't care about greater moral
principles. And so, it's clear that many families are
extremely anxious about this. And one of the things
the churches do, and not, and not just At
the churches, the mosques, the, the temples, um, as
well, they offer families a kind of reassurance that
we will help to keep your family values on
track. Now, of course, family values can can mean
anything, it can mean. Um, THE moral teachings which
keep the family together, but it can also mean
as things as practical as, you know, Sunday school
and, um, uh, sports for the teenagers and youth
clubs and, uh, all of that kind of stuff.
And the successful religious movements managed to do a
lot of those things in a bundled way. So
they say, yes, there's moral teaching, there's spiritual and
ritual activity, you know. Him singing, uh, prayer, etc.
BUT there's also, you know, sporting activity, um, ways
of bringing the teenagers together in a wholesome environment,
so they're not tempted to, uh, go out and
hang around in street corners where they might get
recruited by gangs and so forth. And that's a
tremendously powerful selling point, uh, to, for many religious
movements in countries that are undergoing quite wrenching economic
transformation.
In the book, at a certain point, you talk
about religions as businesses. So, could you explain that
in what ways do religions operate as businesses?
Well, to make a very simple point, Even if
you have the most. Um, REFINED of spiritual messages
that you want to transmit, you have to find
a way to transmit it. I mean, you know,
you can go and stand on a street corner
and preach, but pretty soon in most, uh, places
you'll be moved on. Uh, SO what you need
to do, you need to find a room or
a hall in which to transmit your religious message.
Well, uh, somebody might give you free access to
a garage or something, but if you want to
transmit your religious message to a few other people,
then you're going to need to rent a space.
So that means you're going to have enough, um,
revenues to pay the rent on the building in
which you preach and so on. And as soon
as you start getting a little bit active and.
Uh, PEOPLE want to listen to your, uh, spiritual
message, then you'd better get organized, and it can
be, uh, as, as banal and ordinary as, uh,
uh, acquiring the resources to pay the rent on
the room in which you hold your Sunday meeting
or your Friday prayers or whatever it might be,
but, um. Uh, THEN, once you try to do
things on a slightly more ambitious scale, you need
a budget, you need, uh, you need logistics, you
need maybe staff, you need, um, uh, you need
everything to manage that activity. And that's not, uh,
belittling religious movements. It's just to say that. Since
the dawn of history, we've seen people with inspirational
messages disappear without trace because they didn't have the
logistics to back them up. And every single religious
movement that has succeeded, has succeeded not just because
the founder had an inspiring message, but because they
had the logistics to deliver that message.
So in the book, when trying to tackle the
question, why do religious religious movements take the variety
of forms they do, you talk about the business
models of different secular firms and how they apply
to different religious movements. Could you tell us a
little bit about that?
OK, well, um, so I think the first thing
to say is that I work a lot with
the idea that religious movements are platforms. Now, uh,
not all secular firms are platforms, but many platforms
are secular and not at all religious. But what
platforms all have in common is that they create
communities and in particular they create communities that consist
of relationships between two or more. Uh, USERS of
the platform, which would not have been able to,
uh, occur or develop, or at least not to
the same degree in the absence of the platform,
and the benefits that are created by those relationships
create some resources. Which the platform can derive its
revenues and its its own ability to, to operate.
Um, NOW, you know, platforms as such have been
around since the dawn of history. I mean, even,
say people who set up marketplaces on the Silk
Road in the, uh, you know, in the uh
in the 14th century, or people who, um, or
matchmakers in a village who would put, uh, you
know, potential families of husbands and families of wives
in touch with each other would take a Uh,
a percentage from the, from the parents or, um,
uh, you know, uh, uh, intermediaries, middlemen who would
put. Um, MERCHANTS in touch with, with other, uh,
other traders, uh, would also take a cut. So
those are platforms in a sense. The, the, uh,
in the modern world, many platforms are digital, uh,
entities, so things like Facebook and Google and Amazon
and so on, all create value by putting different
users together and then they take a certain percentage
of that value. So I use that general model,
but of course, just as there are many different
kinds of platforms, so, you know, Amazon is a
massive e-commerce platform, but your local uh Facebook user
group for, I don't know, the people who go
hiking in the woods behind your house uh is
also a platform, and they're very different kinds of
platforms. Um, SO partly I just introduce the reader
in the book to the idea that religious movements,
similar to other platforms can take many different shapes.
They can be very big, they can be very
small, etc. But what I also do is to
take, um, inspiration from the, uh, history of many
different types of secular firm to help us understand
the way in which religious movements are born, grow.
Uh, EXPAND or contract or die, or disappear or
flourish, or whatever. And so, I look at things
like, um, uh, what's the, um, what's the mission
of the movement? I look at what happens when
the founders, uh, disappear, either because they die or
they retire, or they're banished by scandal, or they're
kicked out or whatever. And You know, there's lots
of um interesting parallels with the way that happens
in secular firms. So most secular firms begin as
family businesses, and then at some point the founder
moves on, uh, for whatever reason, and then the
question comes, who takes over from the founder? Is
it going to be a family member of the
founder, or is it going to be an outsider?
And if so, what's the process for bringing the
outsider in and so on, and how does the
choice between appointing a successor who's a family member
versus a successor who's an outsider, uh, affect the
different strategies of, of the firm. Now, you can
ask all of those questions. ABOUT secular firms, and
there's lots of insight to be had from looking
at the history of secular firms. But then that
turns out to be quite interesting and inspiring for
understanding religious movements because they face exactly the same
constraints at some point, the founder is going to,
uh, is going to fade out. Uh, AGAIN, it
could be that the grim reaper carries them off,
or it could be that. Um, THEY hand over
voluntarily to somebody else, or it could be that,
uh, they're kicked out because of some financial or
sexual scandal or whatever. All sorts of possibilities, but
then the question is what happens next? And time
and again in the history of religious movements, you
see. Um, EITHER that the movement collapses with the
eclipse of the founder because there's nobody else who
can take over, or that the movement goes from
strength to strength, when, as in the history of
Christianity, for example, after the death of the founder,
essentially the movement looked as though it was in
deep trouble until an absolutely brilliant entrepreneur, uh, Saul
of Tarsus, um, took over and uh gave new
dynamism to the movement and took it to the
uh place where it occupies today.
What makes religions, or at least some of them
so successful as cultural institutions?
Well, the important point that most distinguishes, I would
say, most religious movements from many of their secular
counterparts is that they, Have become successful in part
by articulating a vision of the place of their
members' lives in the wider universe. Um, NOW, many,
Individual secular businesses try to do that as well.
So if you think a little bit about, let's
say, the culture of innovation in Silicon Valley, a
lot of firms that are very innovative, create a
kind of aura around innovation, and people who join
them tend to think of themselves as innovative people
and so innovation is a sort of, uh, as
it were, uh, a, a story that people tell
even around secular businesses. But many other secular businesses.
Aren't really quite so able to articulate that. So
if you think about many of the big platforms,
um. Uh, TAKE a platform like, say, Airbnb or
uh Uber. These are immensely successful platforms, but it's
a little difficult to know quite, if, if you're,
say, an Uber driver or if you're a, a,
a, a homeowner who's advertising on. Airbnb, you tend
to kind of think that you're doing your own
thing, you're doing your own life and the platform
is just your sort of logistical tool to help
you. The platform isn't giving you a story of
your life and why what you're doing makes sense
in in a bigger picture. Uh, IT'S kind of
left up to the individual members. Well, in most
religious platforms, it's not like that. Most of the
religious platforms are doing more than that. They're saying
not just. OK, uh, you decide whether you come
to us because you want to find a marriage
partner or whether you want to, uh, uh, have
somebody to send a moral message to your kids
in Sunday school, or whether you want to, um,
spend a lot of time singing in the choir,
or whether you want to, uh, spend your weekends
in the youth club, um. Uh, YOU, you decide
that by yourself and we don't do it. No,
on the contrary, you do want the movement for
all of those things, but at the same time
you want to come together and in Friday prayers
in the mosque or in uh in in uh
uh Sunday uh sermon, you want somebody to tell
you what is this all about. And um. Uh,
SO people are very receptive to a narrative that
fits all of these activities into some wider place
in the universe. And I think that's what has
made religious movements very successful, even if sometimes the
bulk of what they're offering is also being offered
by other secular organizations. It's, it's, as it were,
the packaging that really does it all. I mean,
some secular businesses do it in a different way.
So if you think about Some of the big
luxury brands like um LVMH or Hermes or something
which are obviously French companies that are have been
fantastically successful. I mean, a lot of what they
do is, you know, they make a lot of
individual things, so LVMH has become particularly well known
for making handbags, and you might say, well, it's
bizarre that they can charge so much for just
a piece of leather that, you know, people stick
their keys and their wallet in. Um, BUT the
reason they can do that is that they have
constructed a whole story around. You know, trade craft,
artisanship, the fact that, you know, when you buy
one of these things, you're in some kind of
mystical way connecting both to the artisans who made
it and also to the group of very select
customers who also bought it and you feel yourself
part of this great flowing river of artisan tradition
and at the same time, global luxury and so
on. I mean, don't ask me because I don't
buy LVMH uh leatherwear, but Um, what I, the
fact that I don't buy it doesn't make me,
um, at all. Uh, CYNICAL about or, or, or
mocking of the immense skill with which a company
like ALBMH has constructed this narrative around the products
that they sell, which means that they can sell
them for massive multiples of what it actually costs
them to produce these, these goods. And so I
think, uh, in, in the same way that I'm
not personally religious, um, and I don't think that's
a problem for me in studying this, but that
doesn't make me either cynical about or. Mocking of
the immense skill with which many religious movements have
managed to construct a narrative around the way in
which all of their um activities fit together, which
clearly speaks to very many people. Um, I don't
take the fact that I don't have a particular
place for that in my own life as saying
anything about whether anybody else should, and I am
admiring of the immense skill with which many movements
do construct that story.
Mhm. So, uh, the question I'm about to ask
you probably also speaks to the success of religions.
What are the individual needs of human beings to
which religious movements speak?
Oh, wow, those are enormously wide. Um, SOMEWHERE in
the book, I, I talk about the fact that
discussion of the psychology of religion has, I think,
been rather uh led astray by the fact that
in the 1920s, I think it was, uh, Rudolf
Otto wrote an immensely successful book called Das Heiliger,
the, the Holy. Um, IT'S, uh, um. It's usually
translated as the, the sense of the holy. um,
AND, um, he was speaking, I think, to a
very particular, rather inward-looking Protestant tradition, which identified, um.
Religiosity with a particular sensation that people feel, sort
of, uh, which is kind of or or uh
spelled AWE or um some kind of. Fear or
or terror at the vastness of nature and the
universe. So it's the kind of thing that you
might feel, say if you were out in a
rather wild area of countryside, when you see the,
the sun coming up in the morning, you would
feel, Overwhelmed by and flooded by a sort of
combination of immense respect and love and honestly fear
for the hugeness of the universe in which you
are an insignificant part. Now, I don't want to
in any way belittle. The experience of people who
feel that, I've felt it myself. I don't, again,
it doesn't lead me in a religious direction, but
I don't think that's definitive of um religion, or
it's, is it, I don't think it's the dominant
or even necessarily the, the most important of the
needs that in that religions speak to. It's one
of them. Um, IT'S one of many. Um, THERE
are a lot of people who never feel that,
but who get a huge amount. Of, um, genuine
satisfaction and fulfillment from, say, singing together in, uh,
a community. And, you know, not just singing any
old, old song, but singing specifically devotional and spiritual
songs. There are people who get enormous pleasure from
physical movement, from dancing. From crying out, so a
lot of the Pentecostal movements provide a kind of
legitimating space in which people can really let it
all come out, and they can, they can speak
in tongues, they can shout, they can cry, they
can scream, they can wriggle on the floor, and
that's immensely important for some people, not for others.
I think other people prefer the quiet community of
being with others who are like them, where they
don't necessarily. Have to impress anybody. They don't necessarily
have to be, um, have to be very communicative,
but where they're just aware that there's a quiet
community of contemplative people a bit like them. There
are others who see their religion in a much
more martial spirit. So whether it's jihadis in the
certain radical brands of Islam or whether it's Christian
crusaders in the Middle Ages or whether it's Um,
uh, whether it's, you know, uh, certain kinds of
Hindu nationalists who feel that, uh, you know, your
religion isn't important to you if you're not prepared
to go out and fight for it. Now, I'm
not at the moment passing moral judgments on any
of these particular kinds of things, but if you
ask me what are the needs that people have
to which religion speaks, it's not any one of
those, it's all of them. Um, AND none of
them is particularly privileged. And what makes religious platforms
so successful is that their leaders are very good
at sort of sensing in a particular social situation,
which of those needs are not really being met
by other institutions of modern society.
So let me now ask you a question that
is highly debated among the cognitive scientists of religion
and even scientists of religion more generally. Uh, uh,
I would like to hear your opinion on this.
How has, uh, religion evolved? I mean, is, is
it an adaptation? Is it a byproduct of different
adaptations, or is it a result of cultural evolution,
for example, what is your take on this
question? OK, last question. Um, WE don't absolutely know,
but I think we have some conjectures, and I
devote a whole chapter in the book to setting
out the alternative theories, and I can't summarize them
all here. But what I think I can say
with reasonable confidence is that um, Religion has evolved
um in virtually, well, in every society that we
know of. But, and this is very important, it
has not, um, not everybody in those societies, is
religious. So, we have the puzzle that religion is
robustly universal across societies, but it's not robustly universal
within societies. Now, why is that important? Because there
are a lot of features of, um, our human
existence, which are Universal across species and more or
less universal within them. So take our eyes, uh,
some kind of organ for perceiving light and for
helping us to navigate with light is, um, pretty
much universal among vertebrates. Um, AND the only cases
where we don't see it is in, say, fish
that live in, uh, caves deep underground where there
is no light. Um. And so we can safely
say, and, and it's also true that, um, obviously
there are certain individuals who are blind, but that's
a huge adaptive handicap for them. OK? So we
can pretty much say, any vertebrate who's trying to
move around, um, needs a light sensing organ, and
nature has found a huge number of. Ways to
natural selection has hit on a huge number of
different designs for light sensing organs to enable us
to do that. So in a certain sense you
can say eyes are universal and they must have
had a huge adaptive advantage. Now there is no
equivalent of the religious eye, that is to say,
there is no. Psychological capacity for sensing the presence
of God or gods, which, like the eye, is
universal across societies and universal in them. Instead, we
have a different, um, Situation in which pretty much
every society has developed some form of religious activity.
But in all societies that we know of, there
are many people who just don't particularly feel the
need for religion. And that suggests that unlike the
case of the individual light sensing eye, where there's
a huge individual advantage to um developing this capacity.
In the case of religion, there almost certainly isn't
a huge individual advantage that applies to everybody. What
there is instead is a big group advantage to
developing religious activity, and the group then has a
big incentive to try to make sure that the
individuals um conform to that. And um uh uh
uh because it's costly to monitor people, not everybody
is, uh, actually going to conform to that. Only
some people and the society is not going to
invest enormous resources into trying to ensure that absolutely
everybody has a religious, uh, uh, sensibility or capacity
or preferences or whatever you call it. Um, AND
what therefore happens is that in every society settles
into some kind of what biologists would call, uh,
um, a, a polymorphism in which there are a
number of people, usually a majority who are broadly
religious, and there's a minority who Not. And depending
on how repressive the society is, the minority either
feel free to acknowledge that they're not particularly interested
in religion, or they have to be keep quiet
about it. But basically, um, the nature of the
religious preferences and the religious sensibility is absolutely not
like the nature of the Uh, for example, the
organ for perceiving light. Now, going on from that,
if that's what you accept as the basic thing
that's evolved, there's then a whole lot of questions
you can ask about how did it happen? And
I would say that there's broadly two schools of
thought on this. One which is um uh characterized
by the work of Aaron Norenza and others like
Joe Henrick on so-called big gods, says that for
some reason that we don't really know, um, Uh,
certain communities began to develop the idea that there
was a God who, uh, sort of looked over
what everybody was doing and made people feel very
guilty if they were not conforming to various kinds
of pro-social norms. And societies which could develop that
became much more cohesive and were able to compete
much more effectively against societies which didn't. Um, NOW,
although it's, I think undeniably true that this idea
of a God who is watching us is present
in many large societies, I don't myself believe the
Noranza and Henriks story about how it happened historically
or prehistorically. Instead, what I think happened was that
small scale societies became big, not through developing. These
big gods, but instead they became big by coercion.
So, um, as soon as you had forager groups
which developed agriculture and could settle down and create
a surplus, basically you can use the surplus to
pay people, uh, police, um, mercenaries, whatever, to, uh,
enforce. Uh, DISCIPLINE on your society so that people
do not free ride. People do not cheat in
consuming their goods in secret. Instead, they contribute to
the general good. But the problem is that the
larger the society gets, the more resource intensive is
it to run a police state. Running a police
state is spectacularly expensive, as we know from, say,
Stalinism in the 1930s that not only do you
have to, or, you know, East Germany and the
Soviet era that not only do you have to
pay a huge number of people to spy on
others, but the knowledge that you're being spied on
by everybody, including your own children, makes everybody pathologically
risk averse and so the society is less dynamic
and less. So instead, what happens is that as
societies get big. The leaders start to think, well,
look, rather than just employing enormous numbers of secret
police, wouldn't it be simpler if we employ a
smaller number of priests who can get into people's
heads and say, look, God is watching you, and
if you don't do what your religion prescribes, then
you're going to suffer. And because we know that
people are very prone to suggestion from those in
positions of power, that's sort of how it would
work. So, I would say that um the Noranza's
story about big gods is very good description of
what many large world religions actually, um, uh, preach,
but it's not a good description of how we
got to that point.
Mhm. So I've heard the claim many times that
women are on average more religious than men. Is
that true?
It's true, broadly speaking, in Christian countries. It's not
true, broadly speaking in the rest of the world,
and indeed in some countries like Israel or um
in a number of Muslim countries, it's probably the
other way around. But once again, I'd want to
emphasize that a lot depends on what you, uh,
how you are going to define religiosity. If you
define religiosity in terms of private devotion and private
prayer. Then there are many countries in which um
women would probably be as religious or more so
than men. If you define it in terms of
um uh frequency with which they attend services, then
men are in many countries much more religious than
women. And of course you can say, well, that's
partly because of restrictions on women's movements and, and
so on. But all of that, um, I think,
uh, makes us reflect on the big point, which
is that. There isn't a single dimension of religiosity.
It's extremely unlikely that uh even if there were.
That it would appeal just to women or just
to men. Um, INSTEAD, there are multiple dimensions of
religiosity. Some of them appeal more to women than
to men, some of them appeal more to men
than to women. And, uh, whether in a particular
country you see men. Engaged more than women in
particular kinds of religious activities or vice versa, it's
going to depend more on particular social characteristics of
that country, including things like restrictions on women's movement
out of doors, um, restrictions on their ability to
gather in the same space as men, and so
on, which are going to be the explanation for
why you see this gender difference rather than some
intrinsic psychological difference between the, the two genders.
So why is it that so often religious movements
clash over abstruse, very hard to understand and follow
the points of theology and ritual that are hard
for most of their members to understand? Why is
it that something like that happens?
Great question. I think the key to understanding the
answer is to notice that it's very rare for
a religious movement to use its theology as a
recruiting tool. Most, uh, religious movements recruit through other
means. They recruit because they offer a community. They
recruit because they get people excited about the future
of the movement. The theology becomes important to people
once they're inside. So, um, uh, now you may
say, well, still, that's a bit odd. Why, uh,
try to persuade people that, um, a particular theory
of the relationship between Uh, the three persons of
the Holy Trinity is the true one, rather than
some rival theory, which was what, as you would
know very well, led to the council of Nice
in the 4th century, which was, you know, threatening
to split the entire Christian movement. And Um, uh,
the council of NIEA was not sort of trying
to solve a, a doctrinal question like you might
try to, uh, figure out a scientific theory. What
it was really trying to do is a piece
of factional politics to bring um people together who
wanted to be together because they appreciated the community
rather than because they all happened to have been
independently convinced of the truth of some rather abstract
piece of, of doctrine. Now, if you ask, why
does the doctrine have to be so abstract and
so difficult to comprehend, wouldn't it be simpler to
have a simple doctrine? I think the whole point
is that it's a little bit like, um, loyalty
programs in, uh, in, I don't know, say, uh,
think about, say, airlines, you know, you, why, why
does an airline, uh, have a loyalty program? Well,
it has a loyalty program in order to stop
you from switching to rivals. So if once you're,
uh, you know, once you've taken your first flight
with a particular airline, uh, you're offered the chance
to build this up into points. And the whole
thing about the points is that they're going to
be a disincentive for you to choose a rival
airline for your next flight. So I, I see
a lot of doctrine as having a rather similar
function. It's of course, interesting for people to think
about the nature of God. The nature of the
universe and so on, and to argue about particular
theories of that. But in some sense, it's good
for the movement if the theories you sign up
to as a member, make it unattractive for you
to join a rival movement. So, think about, say,
the doctrine of um transubstantiation in Roman Catholicism, which
is the doctrine that the, in the, the, uh,
the Eucharist, the. The wine and the, and the
bread are transformed into the, literally not figuratively into
the body and blood of Jesus. Well, now, um,
if you're really become convinced of that, it's kind
of hard to become a Protestant, uh, because the
Protestants. Deny that. And if that's become an important
part of your relationship to the ritual you undertake,
you're going to find it just less attractive to
become a Protestant. But of course there's a trade-off
because of course the less believable the doctrine is,
the more people are going to say, well, I
can't really believe that, so I'm maybe I should
go to a church that isn't going to want
me to do that. And there, of course, you
know, a lot of history of people who've left
the Roman Catholic Church because they couldn't believe doctrines.
Like that. But the fact of the matter is
that, I mean, the, I cite in the book
that a survey by the Pew Research Trust which
shows that in the US, roughly speaking, 1/3 of
Catholics believe transubstantiation, 2/3 don't. And that's interesting for
two reasons. One is, it's interesting that 13 do
believe it, given that nobody who's not a Catholic
would even consider that a believable theory. But it's
also interesting because 2/3 of Catholics seem to be
perfectly happy not to believe it. And so, it's
part of, if you like, the, it's, it's a
feature not a bug of the movement that it
can. Contain doctrines that clearly appeal enormously to a
subset of their members, while not using those doctrines
as a, as a uh as a reason for
the others of their members to be forced to
leave.
So talking about how different religions and religious movements
organize themselves, how is it that some religious movements
like Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, and even Protestant Christianity maintain
fidelity or maintain the fidelity of their members to
their practices and rituals in the absence of centralized
authorities.
No, that's a great question and um I think
the important answer is through the community of believers.
Now, um, uh, a lot depends on whether you're
talking about the religions of the book or not.
So, let's look first at Protestant Christianity and Islam.
Um, AS you rightly say, There's no equivalent of
the Pope in either of these, uh, in either
of these world religions. And so, you know, there's
no way in which people could be excommunicated by
the equivalent of the Pope for not believing in
the doctrine. But People are still excommunicated in these
communities all the time. I mean, you know, uh,
uh, Muslim imams are constantly pronouncing fatwas and threats
of excommunication against uh other Muslims they think have
the wrong beliefs. Um, Protestants are constantly, um, pronouncing
equivalent to excommunication against people they think have the,
the false beliefs and so on. But, um, the
point is that if you don't, um, Uh, accept
the doctrines of the particular movement, you can just
go and join another. And so, what keeps the
fidelity is, first of all, the fact that there
is a text to which people make reference. Now,
both the Quran and the Bible are enormous bodies
of text. So it's actually pretty easy to Uh,
turn to either of those, uh, books to, um,
support the particular interpretation you've got. So, I don't
know, the question of, um, let's take stuff that
is, uh, not in the, the, the Quran like,
um, uh, wearing the veil. um. There's no specific
verse in the Quran that makes it essential for
women to wear the veil. There's lots of stuff
about women being modest and so on, and so
people who support the wearing the veil say, well,
the verses in the Quran that are about women's
modesty are best interpreted in terms of their obligation
to wear the veil. Similarly, you know, in Christianity.
There's no, I mean, the whole idea that priests
in Roman Catholicism should be unmarried is not supported
by anything in the Bible. Um, uh, THAT was
a piece of doctrine that was bolted on afterwards,
uh, by the Catholic Church. But for that very
reason, Protestants don't think that's a big deal. Um,
BUT things like, you know, um, Attitudes to homosexuality.
Well, there are some horrendous verses in the Bible
in the Old Testament about how you should kill
people who are homosexual. Take Leviticus's book 20. Most
modern Christians conveniently ignore those, not everywhere. I mean,
in countries like Uganda where there is a vicious
uh intolerance of homosexuality, people do appeal to verses
like to books like Leviticus 20. But, you know,
in most sensible countries, they don't. And so, um,
uh, everybody kind of glosses over that part of
the Old Testament, and they kind of justify it
by saying, well, there's nothing really in the New
Testament against it. So, uh, you know, we should
assume that the New Testament is a kind of
improvement on the Old Testament. Um, ALL of that
is to say that essentially, um, there's no way
in those traditions to, um, Determine what's authentic without
ambiguity. So instead, authenticity is determined really by a
vote of the faithful. I mean, if a particular
pastor is preaching stuff that everybody in their congregation
thinks is incompatible with the Bible, people will leave.
And so, um, you know, a pastor takes care
to try and uh use. Copious verses from the
Bible to support their particular interpretation. Although, as I've
already said, um, you can use verses from the
survival from the Bible to support many different interpretations.
Now if you look at things like Hinduism and
Uh, and Buddhism, where there aren't any sort of
authoritative central texts in the same way, then, um,
it's even more true that people, that, that in
some sense authenticity is enforced just simply by the
vote of the people. Um, IF a particular, uh,
individual is, um, say, running a temple and they
do things that are not recognizable as the set
of rights, the puja, which You know, the Hindu
faithful are used to undertaking, then people will just
go. But of course, there are, there's a huge
range of different types of Hindu, um, uh, movement.
There are, you know, traditional temples, there are ashrams,
there are, uh, yoga movements. There are, you know,
Hinduism is, is a vast and varied kind of
movement and on the whole, it's different strokes for
different folks and people pick and choose. At what
point do you want to say that the movement
has become so Uh, removed from original authentic Hinduism
that it's no longer Hindu. I don't know, but
I don't have a horse in this race, and
what I can tell you is that people have
been arguing over that since the dawn of Hinduism.
So, did, you know, Bhagwan Shri Rajneesh, was he
a Hindu? Well, lots of, lots of Hindus would
say he wasn't. Um, HE was just a charlatan
who, um, you know, preyed on people who had
rather vague and fuzzy ideas of Hinduism. But others
would say, no, he was. I mean, you know,
he may have engaged in various kinds of unacceptable
sexual abuse, but uh there was nothing un Hindu
about the message that he was preaching.
Mhm. What is the relationship between religious power and
political power and are religion, religious institutions ever not
political?
Well, there are clearly some religious institutions that try
to stay out of party politics. And I would
say also that, um, particularly in the modern world,
many kinds of religious movements have sought to be
broadly speaking, politically neutral. So, um, Uh, you know,
I would say that the Roman Catholic Church in
some countries, and in particular this was true, I
think, of the United States, um. Did try to
cater to people from all parts of the political
spectrum. Now, that didn't mean that, that didn't mean
that all Catholic churches in the US were politically,
all individual Catholic churches were individually politically neutral, because,
you know, if you were, say, um, A Catholic
Church in Boston or in Chicago, you would have
overwhelmingly people from, uh, say, Ireland, um, who would
be, um, for a large part of the 19th
and 20th centuries, would have been relatively poor. Uh,
WORKING class, they, and so the church would have
tended to be, um, on the left of the
political spectrum, but it wasn't very active or very
vocal on that end of the political spectrum. And
other Catholic churches in more upscale neighborhoods would tend
to be somewhat on the right, and that would
kind of balance out as a whole. Um, uh,
SIMILARLY, I, I use the example of Poland, where
in the, in the communist era, the Polish Church
was to some extent, Anti-communist. But it was also
much more importantly, a source of support for um
people, whoever they were, whether they were very, you
know, intense Catholics, very fervent Catholics, or rather milder
Catholics, whether they were rich or poor, if they
were, um, in any sense threatened by the regime,
then the church was supporting them. So, the church
was very broad-based and not very politically partisan. But,
um, what's happened in both in the United States
and in Poland in the last half century has
been actually a bit longer than that in, in
the United States, is that the churches have become
much more visibly partisan. Um, IN Poland, because after
the fall of communism, there was a huge surge
in support for Catholicism and legitimacy of Catholicism and
the Catholic Church, very unwisely in my view. Decided
that it was going to use that new source
of legitimacy to pursue the political agenda of a
particular rather narrow class of very conservative priests who
then essentially teamed up in coalition with um a
very right wing part of the political spectrum. And
that I think has hurt the legitimacy of the
Catholic Church in Poland quite a lot. In the
United States, it was more complicated because Um, the
movement of, uh, in particular, American Protestantism, away from
broad political neutrality, began not with the growth of
evangelical right wing movements, but much earlier in the
interwar years when mainstream Protestantism, which had been kind
of Socially rather conservative, but, but not. Associated very
strongly with political conservatism, um, began to move in
a liberal direction, partly as a result of the
Uh, sending of many missionaries to other parts of
the world where they came back with a, a
new awareness of injustices in their own society, and
also the many injustices uh raised by the relationship
of uh rich countries to poor countries in the
world. And so, many of the, of the leaders
of the Protestant movements began to move leftward, uh,
trying to agitate for civil rights and so on
in the. In, in the US and that very
much appealed to some part of their members, but
many of their other members who were more conservative,
were not very happy about this at all, and
that was part of what prompted the movement out
of the uh mainstream Protestant churches to the evangelical
movement, which was much more happy accommodating people who
were politically conservative. And so, in other words, in
other words, there have been, um, Periods in history
where, um, religious movements have been quite careful to
try to remain relatively broad based in their political
alignment, and other periods where they've been much more,
um, uh, let's say, focused in, in aligning themselves
with one or other political faction. Now, for most
of human history, until I would say, uh, the
Reformation, um. Most uh uh rulers were, you know,
had their, um their religious leaders to support them.
So whether it was Islamic rulers who would get
their, uh, favorite imams to speak up on their
behalf, or whether it was, um, you know, uh,
Holy Roman emperors who would try to get the,
the popes on board. Um, BUT of course it
didn't always work because, you know, sometimes, as we
know from the periods in Europe when there were
rival popes, um, uh, the, or where the Holy
Roman Emperor would be excommunicated by the Pope for
some reason, um, sometimes the alliance broke down. Similarly,
Um, in Islam, I mean, it's been widely documented
by people like Timouran and Jared Rubin and um
Eric Cheney that, um, you know, Muslim rulers would
have their tame imams who tried to, uh, support
what they were doing, um, but then, You know,
any other imam could come and say, no, this
ruler is a tyrant, and you shouldn't listen to
them, and you shouldn't listen to their corrupt imams
who are just supporting what the rulers are saying,
you should listen to me. And so you would
have a great deal of turbulence. And in fact,
um, So Jean-Philippe Plateau and Emmanuel Laurel, my Toulous's
colleague, have, have done a lot of interesting work.
Jean Philippe has a book called Instrumentalising Islam, in
which he, he talks about the way in which
rulers have constantly tried to gain legitimacy by bringing
rulers on board, except that they can always be
undercut by new rulers, but sorry, by new religious
leaders who point to the way in which the
old religious leaders have. Um, BECOME corrupt by associating
with the political power and then say, no, you
should listen to me because I'm the the true
authentic uncorrupt version. So, I mean, there's this kind
of dance between religious power and political power been
going on forever. And I do say quite strongly
in the book that I think particularly with More
educated publics with um uh the spread of democratic
spirit in the world, even if it's not necessarily
democratic institutions, it's actually quite dangerous for religious leaders
to sell out to political leaders because it may
be in their interests in the short run, but
in the longer run, they risk losing legitimacy in
a big way.
So let me ask you now about the worry
that many people express, particularly, for example, in the
US but also in other places. Is it possible
that religion could provide what is needed for a
successful authoritarian backlash against the sort of hard-won gains
of the last two centuries when it comes to
equality, democracy, and freedom and rights for minorities?
Well, we're certainly seeing many authoritarian leaders trying to
do this. And, um, this is true not just
of leaders like say, President Erdogan of Turkey who,
um, was a very, uh, how can I put
it? I think authentically pious individual early in his
career when he was mayor of Istanbul. His personal
piety was very important, even though Turkey, uh, was,
is a secular state. Um, AND in the early
years of, uh, Erdogan's, uh, prime ministership, he became
known, I think, as Uh, somebody who, although personally
pious, did not try to leverage that into a
source of, you know, he was apparently on board
with the, the, the secular state concept in Turkey.
And of course, that began to change and has
become um been radically overturned in recent years when
he's, I think, rather. Um, DRASTICALLY, uh, reversed course
on his earlier pitch and has really tried to,
uh, associate his regime with authentic Islam. Um, SOMETHING
a little bit similar has happened in India, where,
uh, Narendra Modi was originally formed in the very,
uh, radical religious movement, the RSS, um, but. Sort
of shape shifted as he became governor of Gujarat
to being apparently a technocrat who was interested in
launching Gujarat onto a kind of um innovative, modern
technocratic economy. And since, uh, his, he has consolidated
his, uh, increasingly authoritarian regime has played, uh, more
and more strongly and loudly to the Hindu nationalist.
Uh, MOVEMENT, um, and particularly saying that essentially, India
is a Hindu country instead of what was always
understood under the post, uh, independence framework, as India
being a, uh, let's say a comprehensive, open, secular
country in which Hindus are, have a very special
place. Um, NOW, in some cases, clearly, as in
President Trump in America, Uh, President Xi Jinping in
China, uh, President Putin in Russia, you have people
who have absolutely zero track record as being pious
themselves, who have, I think, shamelessly been playing the
religious card. It's a bit different in China where
I think the Chinese regime's support for Buddhism is
based on fear of, they have a sort of
theory that this kind of Good Buddhism and bad
Buddhism, and Bad Buddhism is what prompts sec separatism
in Xinjiang and in in Tibet. Good Buddhism is
sort of the other kind. And so they're pro
they're trying to prop up what they see as
good Buddhism. But I don't think they're trying to
say that every Chinese citizen should be a Buddhist,
whereas clearly in the case of Russia, um, they're
trying to say that the Russian Orthodox Church should
be. Uh, THE, the source of authority, moral authority
for every Russian citizen, and the fact that the
patriarch of the Russian Church has been outrageously supporting
the aggression and war of Russia against Ukraine is,
is part of what Putin hopes to get out
of that. In, in the US it's a sort
of rather bizarre and slightly surreal sight of an
individual who was never remotely. Uh PIOUS himself, and
indeed who, whose lists of sins, um, you know,
dwarf those of what would have been considered acceptable
under any previous presidency has been taken up by
the religious right as a, as sort of the,
the instrument to save the country from godless atheism.
I mean, it's like so many things about the
Trump presidency would be hilarious if it weren't so.
Uh, uh, SCARY. Um, I mean, let's not get
into that, but the point is, I think you
can say that what's happened in the US is
just like a, an extreme version of a tendency
that's true in many, many other countries in the
world. Now, is that gonna work? Well, you know,
we, we are seeing in Iran, I think, that
increasing loss of legitimacy, not just of The regime
But importantly of the religious leaders who lent their
support to the regime. And that suggests that, you
know, the people can be fooled for quite a
long time, but they can't be fooled forever. And
the more partisan is the message that the religious
leaders, uh, send, the, uh, bigger the cost of
their legitimacy in the long run. The problem is
that it may take a long time, and we
don't know whether the backlash uh to the legitimacy
of the Russian Orthodox Church. Of the Christian religious
right in the United States, of um some of
the Buddhists, the mainstream Buddhists in China, and so
on. We don't know whether that's that backlash is
going to happen fast or slowly or somewhere in
between. That's, I think, the big unknown question. So,
um, there will be a backlash. Um, IN the
meantime, the politicians do benefit from some of the
Uh, the, the sort of the authoritarian messaging that
the religious movements send, um, and we don't really
know whether the short-term advantage they gain out of
that, how long that will last before the backlash
really, uh, comes into effect.
So I think we have time for 2 more
questions. So let me ask you now, how do
you look at the future of religion? Do you
see any particular trends when it comes to religiosity
and secularism?
Well, um, uh, it's a long, uh, it's a,
there are many, many things you could say about
that. I think the important point to notice is
that religion is going to change and adapt. It
always has. OK. So when people say, I can't
believe that religion in its current form is really
adapted to the changes of the challenges of the
21st century, they are of course right. But that
doesn't mean religion's going to disappear. It all depends
on whether and how religion can shift shape and
adapt to those challenges. So, in the 19th century,
people like James Fraser and in the early 20th
century, um Max Weber and Emile Durkheim and so
on, looks at, um, traditional religion as they'd seen
it, and, uh, quite rightly, I think, said this
kind of traditional religion is not well adapted. To
the challenges of the 20th century. Now some of
them went further than others, claiming that it was
going to disappear. But even Fraser and Durkheimer and
and Weber, I don't think, predicted that religion would
die out. What they simply said is that it's
going to change shape. And whether it changes shape
in the sense of retreating into a much smaller
phenomenon in society, or whether it takes a very
different shape altogether is, is hard to, it's hard
to predict at any one moment. But let's say
religion. Um, IS going to adapt, as it always
has. So, in the book, I give the analogy
between the Reformation and the invention of printing, which
led to a huge increase in competition between religious
movements. I think that the growth of, um, social
media, excuse me, the growth of social media. Artificial
intelligence, and so on are going to be as
radical, if not more so, as the invention of
printing was. They're going to see, it's going to
see a huge increase in types of religious message
and competition between religious movements and churn of people
who leave some movements, join others, and so on.
I very much doubt religion will disappear, but I
do think it will look somewhat different in 30
years' time from what it does today.
OK, so one last question then. Are there ways
we can use religious power to manage it for
the good of everyone, including the non-religious?
I do think so. It's a big project, but
I would say, here's a start. At the moment
in um. Most countries in the world, in fact,
I can't think of an exception, um, religious movements
do not necessarily have to pay any tax that,
uh, so, you know, I can go out uh
into a city and I can rent a, a
small building and I can. Open it up to
the public and I can say, uh, come in
and this is my church. Now, normally if I
do that trying to sell something, then I may
be kicked out if I haven't satisfied the registration
requirements, but at the very least, if people start
paying me money because I sell them ballpoint pens
or iPhones or whatever, I will either have to.
Set up as a company, or I will be
expected to pay personal income tax on those, on
those earnings, and personal income tax is much higher
than corporate income tax. So I have a pretty
strong incentive to um register as a company in
order to be able to deduct my expenses and
so forth and not have to pay personal income
tax on all my revenues. The weird thing is
that in the United States, for example, the exception
to that is if I'm running a church. Because,
um, uh, if I just say. I'm offering a
set of spiritual services and I'm the Seabright Salvation
Ministry. Um, IN principle, I don't, not only don't
have to pay any taxes, but I don't have
to declare any accounts. I don't have to give
any account. And the only thing that would stop
me from doing that is if the IRS launches
an investigation into me, which it might do if
it has a tip off, a reliable tip off,
but if not, I could get away with it
for years. So, um. What I think is reasonable
is that religious movements should be constrained as ordinary
charities are. That is to say, if they can
make a case for being a charity for not
paying taxes, they should do so. But importantly, in
return for that, they should have to publish accounts
and with some information that enables people to make
sense of those accounts. That is not required in
the United States. It's not required in a very
large number of countries around the world. That seems
to me. Um, UNREASONABLE. And furthermore, I think that
if you look at things like abuse within churches
and so on, that is facilitated by a culture
in which it's accepted that religious leaders should not
have to, um, Give account for their activities to
anybody else. Um, SO what I would suggest is
that, By breaking the presumption that what religious leaders
do is only their business and not the business
of the rest of society, we could reach a
uh better equilibrium in which religions are considered as
legitimate businesses, but in return for being legitimate businesses,
they should publish accounts, they should be subject to
basic legal provisions on the way they treat their
members. And um it should be understood that. In
return for the privilege of being able to seek
money and other resources from members of the public,
they have a duty to account for what they
do in return. We're a long way from that,
but I think that doing that would be a
tremendous step forward and would benefit religious movements and
their members, as well as the rest of society.
So, the book is again the divine. Economy, how
religions compete for wealth, power, and people. Of course
I'm leaving a leaked tweet in the description of
the interview and Doctor Seabright, just before we go
apart from the book, where can people find your
work on the internet?
Um, MY website is just Paul Seabright.com. OK? No,
the word Paul and Seabright are run together in
one word. Mhm.
Great. I'm also leaving that in the description. And
Dr. Seabright, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
very fascinating conversation.
Thank you very much. Um, I'm very happy to,
uh, been able to communicate with you and with
your listeners. Bye-bye.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
mere Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoo and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren,
Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.